Ethical Issues In Computing Notes


Wednesday 6/1/2016

Kantianism

Immanuael Kant
 	Philosopher in the Age of Enlightenment
	Explain morality with reason

Good Will
	Kant concluded that good will is always good
	If a person's best effort falls short, it is still considered good
	End goals and emotions are not considered

Dutifulness
	Kant maintained that what we want to do does not matter
	What we ought to do is what matters
	
Duties
	Perfect Duties - Duties we are obliged to fulfill
	Imperfect Duties - Optional
Categorical Imperative 
First Formulation
	Universal moral laws
	It's a test for a moral rule... what would happen if everybody did whatever is questioned? would it be good or bad?
	Should not make promises that you cant keep
Second Formulation
	Act so that you always treat both yourself and other people as ends in themselves, and never only as a means to an end
	I must not use other people to accomplish my objective.
	Leaving people uninformed uses them

	Arguments in Favor
		Rational
		All people treated as moral equals
	Arguments Against
		Life is more complicated than a single rule to define complex problems.
		Not always easy to resolve conflict between rules
	
*****************
6/2/2016
Rule Utilitarianism

	Utilitarianism is a philosophy asserting our best moral choice is that which offers the most utility
	Act Utilitarianism focused on the happiness of just those parties affected by a single choice
	Rule Utilitarianism will focus on the bigger picture. Total happiness, the outcome of everyone following that rule, without consideration for the means.
	
	Arguments in Favor
		Reliance on rules frees us from performing the utilitarian calculus on simple decisions.
		Exceptional situations do not overrule moral rules
		Avoids moral luck trap
		Avoids the egocentric trap(by focusing on everyone rather than affected parties alone)

	Arguments Against
		Utilitarianism assumes a single instrument measures completely different consequences.
		Ignores unjust distribution of good by favoring on the total outcome.
		

Social Contract Theory

Thomas Hobbes

	Thomas Hobbes popularized in western culture during the age of enlightenment.
	Addresses the authority of the state over an individual.
	What gives the King, president, etc authority over us?

	US Declaration of Independence invokes Social Contract Theory
	Life, liberty and the pursuit of Happiness
	That to secure these, Governments are instituted among Men.
	
	To avoid "solitary, poore, nasty, brutish and short" lives
	People adopt rules to govern their relationships
	Governments enforce those rules
	individuals surrender a portion of their freedom and submit to the authority of a government
	
The Social Contract
	Morality consists of those rules governing the people
	Rational people accept these rules for their mutual benefit
	On the condition others follow those rules as well
	

	People should be governed by The Law
		Not by the arbitrary agendas of government officials

	Arguments in Favor
		Framed in the language of rights
		Explains why rational people act from self-interest in absence of a common agreement.
	
	Arguments Against
		None of us signed the Social Contract ... Just hypothetical
		Actions can be characterized in multiple ways
		Doesn't explain how to solve a moral problem involving individual rights.


*****************
6/6/2016

Virtue Ethics

	Virtue Theory
		Many ethical theory ignore morals
			Living a moral life, moral education, moral wisdom, family and social relationships, emotion

		Virtue ethics defines a path to achieving one's potential by living a virtuous life, a life well-lived.
		Virtue ethics focuses on the dilemma, "What sort of people should we be?"

	Virtue examples:
	Charity
	Courage
	Dignity
	Discipline
	Frugality
	Humanity
	Industriousness
	Humility
	Mercy
	Patience
	Prudence
	Temperance
	Truthfulness
	Wisdom

	Virtue involves more than a choice of action or following rules
	Virtue Ethics emphasizes what a choice of action says about the development of one's character
	We learn virtue through practice.
	Virtue Ethics encourages a choice of action consistent with the habits of a virtuous person in the same circumstances.

	Arguments in Favor
	
	Considers emotions
	Many arguments are simplified
	Personal relationships are considered. All people simply aren't equal.
	Virtue is a habit developed through years of practice
	No unresolvable moral dilemmas

	Arguments Against
	
	People may not agree on the list of virtues.
	Difficult or impossible to use to guide government policy as a government is not a character.
	Undermines attempts to hold people responsible as virtuous behavior is developed over time.

